>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JULY 26:
AS HIS TRIP TO AFRICA CONTINUES,
THE PRESIDENT VOWS TO STAND BY
KENYA IN ITS FIGHT AGAINST
TERRORISM.
>> PRESIDENT KENYATTA AND I
SPENT A LOT OF TIME DISCUSSING
THE SERIOUS THREAT FROM AL-
SHABAAB THAT KENYA FACES.
>> Sreenivasan: IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT: PRESSED INTO SERVICE.
TUNISIAN FISHERMEN SAVING THE
LIVES OF MIGRANTS STRANDED AT
SEA.
>> Sreenivasan: AND ALTERED
IMAGES AND THE DILEMMA FOR
PHOTOJOURNALISM.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS ARRIVED IN
THE ETHIOPIAN CAPITAL OF ADDIS
ABABA, CONTINUING HIS MISSION TO
BOOST U.S. TRADE AND TIES WITH
AFRICA.
EARLIER SUNDAY, THE PRESIDENT
COMPLETED HIS VISIT TO HIS
FATHER'S HOMELAND OF KENYA, WITH
A STADIUM SPEECH TO AN
ENTHUSIASTIC CROWD OF 4,500
PEOPLE.
THE PRESIDENT CRITICIZED KENYA'S
HISTORY OF CORRUPTION AND
GENDER INEQUALITY, BUT PRAISED
ITS BUDDING DEMOCRACY.
HIS HALF-SISTER, AUMA,
INTRODUCED OBAMA, WHO CALLED
HIMSELF THE FIRST KENYAN-
AMERICAN PRESIDENT.
WITH A GROWING ECONOMY IN KENYA,
THE PRESIDENT SAID THERE WAS NO
LIMIT ON WHAT YOUNG KENYANS
COULD ACHIEVE.
>> YOU DON'T NEED TO DO WHAT MY
FATHER DID AND LEAVE YOUR HOME
IN ORDER TO GET A GOOD EDUCATION
AND ACCESS TO OPPORTUNITY.
BECAUSE OF KENYA'S PROGRESS,
BECAUSE OF YOUR POTENTIAL YOU
CAN BUILD YOUR FUTURE RIGHT
HERE, RIGHT NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: HIS ADDRESS WAS
LESS THAN 10 MILES FROM THE
LOCATION OF THE 2013 NAIROBI
MALL ATTACK THAT LEFT MORE THAN
60 PEOPLE DEAD.
THE ISLAMIC MILITANT GROUP
RESPONSIBLE FOR THAT ATTACK, AL-
SHABAAB, CARRIED OUT A CAR
BOMBING SUNDAY IN NEIGHBORING
SOMALIA, KILLING AT LEAST 13
PEOPLE OUTSIDE A MOGADISHU
HOTEL.
PRESIDENT OBAMA PROMISED THE
U.S. WILL HELP KENYA FIGHT THE
ONGOING THREAT.
>> WE ARE PROUD OF THE EFFORTS
THAT WE ARE MAKING TO STRENGTHEN
KENYA'S CAPABILITIES THROUGH OUR
NEW SECURITY GOVERNANCE
INITIATIVE.
WE ARE GOING TO STAND SHOULDER
TO SHOULDER WITH YOU IN THIS
FIGHT AGAINST TERRORISM FOR AS
LONG AS IT TAKES.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'LL HAVE MORE
ON THE PRESIDENT'S AFRICA TRIP
IN A MOMENT.
IN SYRIA, PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-
ASSAD IS VOWING TO WIN HIS
COUNTRY'S DEVASTATING CIVIL WAR.
IN HIS FIRST PUBLIC SPEECH IN A
YEAR, ASSAD ACKNOWLEDGED HIS
GOVERNMENT TROOPS HAVE
SURRENDERED CONTROL OF SOME
TOWNS AND CITIES TO REBEL
GROUPS, HE SAID, IN ORDER TO
DEFEND OTHER TERRITORY.
>> (translated): WE MUST
DEFINE THE IMPORTANT REGIONS
THAT THE ARMED FORCES HOLD ON TO
SO IT DOESN'T ALLOW THE COLLAPSE
OF THE REST OF THE AREAS.
>> Sreenivasan: AFTER FOUR YEARS
OF FIGHTING, ASSAD-ALLIED FORCES
ARE THOUGHT TO CONTROL LESS THAN
HALF OF THE COUNTRY.
ONE OF ASSAD'S STRONGEST ALLIES,
IRAN, IS HOPING TO CONVINCE ITS
PERSIAN GULF NEIGHBORS TO
SUPPORT THE NUCLEAR DEAL
APPROVED LAST WEEK BY THE U.N.
SECURITY COUNCIL.
IN KUWAIT, IRANIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER MOHAMMAD ZARIF CALLED
FOR ARAB UNITY AND SAID NO
COUNTRY CAN SOLVE REGIONAL
PROBLEMS WITHOUT THE HELP OF
OTHERS.
ZARIF IS ALSO VISITING QATAR AND
IRAQ.
SOME GULF STATES WORRY LIFTING
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS ON IRAN WILL
FREE UP MONEY FOR IRAN TO FUND
MILITANT GROUPS THAT POSE A
THREAT TO THE REGION.
THE BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA ARE
EXPECTED TO LIFT A BAN ON OPENLY
GAY ADULT LEADERS TOMORROW, BUT
NOT COMPLETELY.
THE SCOUTS' NATIONAL EXECUTIVE
BOARD SAYS IT PLANS TO RATIFY A
NEW POLICY ALLOWING LOCAL UNITS
TO SELECT ADULT LEADERS WITHOUT
REGARD TO SEXUAL ORIENTATION.
A BIG EXCEPTION: CHURCHES THAT
SPONSOR SCOUT UNITS MAY STILL
REJECT GAY ADULT LEADERS AND
VOLUNTEERS.
MORE THAN 70% OF SCOUT UNITS ARE
SPONSORED BY CHURCHES.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT
OBAMA IS IN ETHIOPIA TONIGHT,
THE FIRST SITTING U.S. PRESIDENT
TO VISIT THAT COUNTRY.
HIS STOP COMES AFTER A THREE-DAY
VISIT TO KENYA.
ONE GOAL OF THE TRIP:
STRENGTHENING TRADE BETWEEN SUB-
SAHARAN AFRICA AND THE U-S.
ANOTHER: FIGHTING TERRORISM.
TO DISCUSS THOSE AND OTHER
ISSUES, I'M JOINED BY FORMER
U.S. AMBASSADOR TO NIGERIA, JOHN
CAMPBELL, NOW THE RALPH BUNCHE
SENIOR FELLOW FOR AFRICA POLICY
STUDIES AT THE COUNCIL ON
FOREIGN RELATIONS.
SO LET'S START WITH THE TERROR
ONE.
HOW IS FIGHTING TERROR IN AFRICA
IN I GUESS THE U.S. INTERESTS
TODAY?
>> TERRORISM IN AFRICA IS A
DIRECT THREAT, NOT TO U.S.
SECURITY, BUT TO U.S. INTERESTS.
A FUNDAMENTAL U.S. INTEREST IN
AFRICA IS THERE BE CONTINUED
PROGRESS TOWARDS DEMOCRACY,
TOWARDS DEVELOPMENT TOWARDS
STABILITY.
TERRORISM IS ACTIVE IN THE
SAHEL, THESE ARE ALT AREAS WHERE
THE U.S. HAS BEEN WORKING FOR A
LONG TIME.
>> LET'S LOOK AT THE ECONOMIC
IMPACT AS WELL.
THERE SEEMS TO BE ALMOST A RACE
HERE TO PERHAPS COUNTER THE
INFLUENCE THAT CHINA HAS ALREADY
IN AFRICA AS A TRADING PARTNER
AS A COUNTRY THAT IS MAKING
SIGNIFICANT INVESTMENTS THERE.
>> MY VIEW THAT THAT CAN BE
OVEREMPHASIZED.
CHINA HAS ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN
AFRICA.
THE REAL INTEREST IS THAT
CHINESE ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN
AFRICA BE RESPONSIBLE.
AND THAT PARTICULAR IN PEACE AND
SECURITY QUESTIONS, THAT CHINA
PLAY A ROLE, COMMENSURATE WITH
ITS ECONOMIC POSITION IN
PARTICULARLY EAST AFRICA.
>> AND SO WHEN THE PRESIDENT
LAYS OUT THIS SORT OF
ENTREPRENEURIAL FORUMS, HOW
POSSIBLE IS THAT?
>> WELL, IT WILL TAKE SOME TIME
OBVIOUSLY BUT THE POPULATION OF
SUBSAHARAN AFRICA IS APPROACHING
1 BILLION.
THERE ARE ALL SORTS OF HURDLES
TO OVERCOME.
SUBSAHARAN HE AFRICA, IS VERY
LITTLE INTRAAFRICAN TRADE.
SO THERE IS A LOT OF DEVELOPMENT
TO BE DONE.
>> CLINTON AND BUSH AS WELL,
PEPFAR, EMERGENCY AIDS RELIEF.
THERE WERE ANNOUNCEMENTS FOR A
NEW INITIATIVE FOCUSING ON
ADOLESCENT GIRLS TOO.
>> THERE WAS INDEED.
ALSO VERY IMPORTANT U.S.
INITIATIVE THAT'S BEEN
OVERLOOKED IS MALARIA.
SIMPLE PROGRAMS SUCH AS
PROVIDING BED NETS FOR PEOPLE,
CAN GREATLY REDUCE THE MORTALITY
RATES ESPECIALLY FOR CHILDREN.
>> PRESIDENT OBAMA LEAVING
BEHIND A DIFFERENT BECAUSE OF
HIS BACKGROUND?
>> REALLY IN TWO BROAD AREAS FOR
ONE THING BECAUSE OF HIS
BACKGROUND, I THINK AFRICA HAS
WILLY-NILLY BEEN INTRODUCED TO
SOME AMERICANS WHO OTHERWISE
NEVER WOULD HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT
IT.
SIMILARLY, THE FACT THAT THE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
IS AN AFRICAN AMERICAN, THAT IS
OF PARTICULAR INTEREST AND
INDEED EVEN PRIDE STRAIGHT
ACROSS THE AFRICAN CONTINENT.
SO YES, BOTH IN THE UNITED
STATES BUT ALSO IN AFRICA.
>> ALL RIGHT JOHN CAMPBELL,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU SO VERY MUCH FOR
HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: READ MORE ABOUT
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TRIP TO
AFRICA, INCLUDING HIS CALL FOR
GREATER EQUALITY FOR WOMEN AND
MINORITIES, ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT TONIGHT LOOKS AT THE
CRISIS OF MIGRANTS FROM AFRICA
AND THE MIDDLE EAST RISKING
THEIR LIVES ON THE MEDITERRANEAN
SEA IN SEARCH OF A BETTER LIFE.
FOR MANY, THEY TAKE TO THE WATER
FROM LIBYA, WHERE THE
LAWLESSNESS OF CIVIL WAR ALLOWS
SMUGGLERS TO EASILY LAUNCH
DESPERATE REFUGEES HOPING TO
LAND IN EUROPE.
THE JOURNEY OFTEN STARTS IN THE
COASTAL TOWN OF ZUWARA, LIBYA.
THE GOAL: TO REACH THE SHORES OF
ITALY, SOME 300 MILES AWAY.
BUT WHEN THE CURRENTS ARE ROUGH,
OR THE BOATS GET LOST, THE
MIGRANTS SOMETIMES END UP
STRANDED IN THE WATERS OFF
NEIGHBORING TUNISIA.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT LISA DESAI
REPORTS FROM TUNISIA WITH THE
STORY OF LOCAL FISHERMAN WHO ARE
SAVING LIVES.
>> Reporter: IT'S JUST AFTER
SUNRISE IN THE COASTAL TOWN OF
ZARZIS, IN SOUTHERN TUNISIA.
TOURISM AND FISHING ARE THE
STAPLE OF THE LOCAL ECONOMY.
AND THE FISHERMEN SELL THEIR
CATCHES OF DORADO AND TUNA, IN
THE EARLY HOURS OF THE MORNING.
HERE ON THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA, A
PROBLEM PLAGUES EUROPE AND MANY
AFRICAN COUNTRIES-- AND IT'S
BEEN GROWING SINCE THE CIVIL WAR
BEGAN FOUR YEARS AGO IN
NEIGHBORING LIBYA.
A MASS EXODUS OF MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES FROM THE MIDDLE-EAST
AND AFRICA HAVE BEEN DRAWN TO
LIBYA, WHERE A LACK OF CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY ALLOWS
HUMAN SMUGGLERS TO OPERATE
FREELY.
THE MIGRANTS MAKE THE DANGEROUS
JOURNEY ON THE MEDITERRANEAN
WITH ONE GOAL IN MIND: LANDING
ON EUROPEAN SHORES.
WOODEN BOATS AND INFLATABLE
PLASTIC RAFTS, OFTEN OVERFLOWING
WITH MIGRANTS, HAVE BEEN SINKING
ONE AFTER ANOTHER, CLAIMING
THOUSANDS OF LIVES.
AND THESE MEN HAVE FOUND
THEMSELVES ON THE FRONTLINES OF
A HUMANITARIAN CRISIS.
WE'RE ON A TUNISIAN FISHING BOAT
IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA.
THE FISHERMEN HERE SAY THAT OVER
THE LAST SIX MONTHS ALONE THEY
HAVE RESCUED MORE THAN 500
MIGRANTS ON THE VERGE OF
DROWNING.
>> (translated): ONE TIME WE
RESCUED 10 MIGRANTS.
WHEN THEY GOT ON THE BOAT TWO OF
THEM STARTED PRAYING.
IT GAVE ME CHILLS, ALL OVER MY
BODY.
WE ARE FISHERMAN.
WE ARE HERE TO MAKE A LIVING.
WE ARE NOT HERE TO RESCUE
PEOPLE, BUT WE HAVE A FEELING OF
HUMANITY.
SO IF I FIND SOMEONE ON THE SEA,
I WILL SAVE HIM.
>> Reporter: BUT EVEN WITHOUT
THE RIGHT EQUIPMENT, THE
FISHERMEN SAY THEY CAN'T TURN
AWAY FROM MIGRANTS LOST AT SEA.
THEY STOP THEIR WORK TO BRING
THEM TO SAFETY ON THE TUNISIAN
SHORE, AND PAY FOR EXTRA FUEL TO
GET THEM THERE.
SOMETIMES THESE UNTRAINED
FISHERMAN RISK THEIR OWN LIVES
PULLING PEOPLE OUT OF THE WATER,
AND SPEND ALL NIGHT WAITING FOR
HELP FROM THE TUNISIAN COAST
GUARD.
>> (translated): IT'S A
POWERFUL FEELING TO SEE SOMEONE
HELPLESS, HUNGRY AND BEING
BURNED BY THE SUN.
IT'S VERY HARD, YOU ARE IN FRONT
OF SOMEONE WHO IS CALLING FOR
HELP.
>> Reporter: MONGI SLIM IS THE
HEAD OF THE ZARZIS OFFICE OF THE
TUNISIAN RED CRESCENT; THE RED
CROSS IN MUSLIM COUNTRIES.
AT THE LOCAL FISHING ASSOCIATION
HE COORDINATES RESCUES... IN
ZARZIS AND OTHER NEARBY PORT
CITIES LIKE BEN GARDANE.
>> THOSE PEOPLE ARE FIGHTING,
EACH ONE WANTS TO GO.
>> Reporter: AND I SEE SOME
PICTURES HERE OF THE BODIES
WASHED UP?
>> YES, THIS, THIS HERE IS IN
BEN GARDANE.
THESE ARE SYRIAN PEOPLE.
HERE IS IN IL KITIF, THE PORT OF
BEN GARDANE.
WE RECEIVED THIS DAY 54 BODIES
FROM SYRIA.
>> Reporter: PHOTO AFTER PHOTO
SHOWS OVERCROWDED BOATS-- MEN
AND WOMEN FIGHTING TO STAY
ALIVE-- AND MIGRANTS DESPERATELY
FLAGGING SHIPS FOR HELP.
WHEN THE FISHERMEN FIND THE
SINKING BOATS, IF THEY ARE CLOSE
ENOUGH TO EUROPEAN WATERS, THEY
CALL THE ITALIAN AUTHORITIES,
BUT SOMETIMES, THE ITALIANS
DON'T SHOW UP.
>> HE HAD TO RESCUE THEM
HIMSELF, BECAUSE NOBODY COME.
AND HE WAITS A LONG TIME AND
NOBODY COME, AND PEOPLE ARE
CRYING IN THE SEA, AND HE MUST
HELP THEM.
>> Reporter: THE LUCKY ONES WHO
MAKE IT TO ZARZIS ALIVE GET HELP
FROM THE RED CRESCENT.
MONGI EARNS HIS LIVING AS A
PHARMACIST, AND HAS MADE IT HIS
VOLUNTEER MISSION TO PROVIDE THE
MIGRANTS WITH SHELTER, FOOD, AND
SUPPORT TO SURVIVE.
CAN YOU TELL ME HOW MANY PEOPLE
LIVE HERE?
>> IN THIS HOUSE, WE HAVE FOUR.
>> Reporter: 18-YEAR-OLD TUBA--
ON THE RIGHT-- IS FROM SENEGAL.
HOW DID YOU END UP HERE IN
TUNISIA?
>> (translated): WE WERE
TRYING TO GO ITALY.
WE LEFT ZWARA TO GO TO
LAMPEDUSA.
>> Reporter: DO YOU REMEMBER THE
DAY THAT YOU WERE RESCUED?
WHAT HAPPENED?
>> (translated): WE SAW LOTS
OF BOATS.
WE WERE TRYING TO CALL THEM, BUT
THEY DIDN'T RESPOND.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE NOW
SEVERAL HUNDRED MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES FROM AFRICA AND THE
MIDDLE EAST LIVING IN THE AREA
AROUND ZARZIS.
MANY FLED WAR, POVERTY, OR
PERSECUTION IN THEIR HOME
COUNTRIES.
SOME STAY ONLY A FEW WEEKS,
BEFORE WALKING 80 MILES ACROSS
THE BORDER TO LIBYA, TO BOARD
BOATS BOUND FOR EUROPE.
ONE MORE TIME.
OUSMAN KEBBEH IS FROM GAMBIA.
HE JOURNEYED BY SEA TO EUROPE
THREE TIMES.
THE FIRST TWO TIMES, HE DIDN'T
GET FAR-- HE WAS RESCUED AND
RETURNED TO LIBYA.
DURING HIS FINAL ATTEMPT, HE WAS
SAVED BY TUNISIAN FISHERMEN.
>> WE JUST WAITING FOR OUR
DEATHS, NO OPTIONS.
YOU JUST INSIDE THE BOAT WAITING
FOR OUR TIME TO DIE.
>> Reporter: THE FISHERMEN SENT
US THIS CELL PHONE FOOTAGE THAT
SHOWS OUSMAN'S RESCUE.
HE WAS ONBOARD A PLASTIC RAFT,
CRAMMED WITH 90 OTHER PEOPLE,
HEADING TO ITALY.
EVENTUALLY, THE BOAT SPRUNG A
LEAK AND SLOWLY BEGAN TO FILL
WITH WATER.
>> THE WATER IS ENTERING INSIDE,
AND THE WAVES IS COMING AGAIN,
THE WATER IS COMING UP.
SO THE WATER IS COMING DIFFERENT
DIRECTIONS.
YOU DON'T KNOW WHERE EXACTLY
WATER IS ENTERING THE BOAT.
SO IT'S A TERRIBLE SITUATION.
SOME PEOPLE ARE VOMITING, SOME
PEOPLE ARE CRYING, SOME PEOPLE
ARE FIGHTING BECAUSE YOU BECOME
CRAZY ON THE SEA.
YOU BECOME DIFFERENT MAN.
SO I WAS JUST THINKING TWO
THINGS, THAT I WILL SURVIVE, OR
I WILL DIE.
THIS IS IT.
>> Reporter: LIKE MOST MIGRANTS,
OUSMAN HAD PUT HIS FATE IN THE
HANDS OF HUMAN SMUGGLERS WHO
TYPICALLY LEAVE THE MIGRANTS TO
DRIVE THE BOATS THEMSELVES.
THE JOURNEY CAN TAKE MORE THAN
24 HOURS, THEY HAVE FEW TOOLS TO
NAVIGATE, SOMETIMES RELYING ON
JUST A COMPASS TO FIND THEIR WAY
TO EUROPE.
IN ZARZIS IT IS COMMON KNOWLEDGE
THAT ONE OF THE WAYS THAT
SMUGGLERS LURE MIGRANTS IS BY
ADVERTISING ON SOCIAL MEDIA WITH
POSTS LIKE THESE: FEATURING
PICTURES OF CRUISE SHIPS, THEY
PROMISE A SAFE JOURNEY, WITH
CHILDREN RIDING FREE.
THIS POST, WHICH WAS RECENTLY
TAKEN DOWN, LISTS THE PRICE PER
ADULT: $1,000 TO BE FERRIED FROM
LIBYA TO ITALY.
OUSMAN IS ONE OF THOUSANDS OF
MIGRANTS WHO HAVE FLOCKED TO THE
WAR TORN COUNTRY BASED ON THE
PROMISE OF MAKING IT TO EUROPE.
BUT ONCE THEY ARRIVE IN LIBYA,
THEY ARE CAUGHT IN VIOLENCE AND
LAWLESSNESS, AND NO CHOICE BUT
TO RISK THEIR LIVES ON THE
MEDITERRANEAN.
>> YOU CANNOT LIVE IN LIBYA.
PEOPLE IN LIBYA, THEY JUST KEEP
ON HARASSING BLACK PEOPLE, KEEP
ON BEATING THEM, KEEP ON LOCK
THEM.
SOME OF THEM KIDNAP YOU IN YOUR
HOUSES, LOCK YOU.
YOU HAVE TO PAY MONEY FOR THEM
OTHERWISE THEY'LL KILL.
SO THE ONLY THING YOU HAVE TO
GO, YOU HAVE TO CROSS TO ITALY.
THIS IS A PROBLEM.
LIBYAN SITUATION IS WORSE,
BECAUSE THERE IS NO GOVERNMENT,
NOBODY IS CONTROL.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, THE
TUNISIAN RED CRESCENT TOOK IN
700 MIGRANTS, AND SO FAR THIS
YEAR THE NUMBER HAS ALREADY
DOUBLED.
MONGI SLIM IS WORRIED ABOUT HOW
TO HANDLE THE GROWING NUMBER OF
MIGRANTS ENDING UP IN THE PORT
CITY OF ZARZIS.
>> NOBODY NOW IS HELPING ENOUGH
THIS PEOPLE.
OUR GOVERNMENT ALSO, WE DON'T
HAVE ANY SHELTER HERE TO THIS
PEOPLE.
WHEN THEY ARRIVE, WE HAVE A BIG
PROBLEM TO RESOLVE THE SHELTER.
>> Reporter: THE DREAM IS TO
MAKE A BETTER LIFE THAN THEY
HAVE IN THERE COUNTRY.
THEIR COUNTRY, THEY WANT TO
SUPPORT THEIR FAMILY.
BUT I THINK THAT THEY CANNOT GET
IT.
>> THE FISHERMAN SAY THEY WILL
CONTINUE RESCUING MIGRANTS.
>> (translated): IT IS RISKY
FOR US, BECAUSE THERE'S
BACTERIA, DISEASE.
AND PEOPLE ARE AFRAID.
BUT IT IS A HUMANITARIAN DUTY,
AND WE DO IT WILLINGLY.
>> THEY ARE GOOD PEOPLE, THEY
LOVE THE SEA, SO THEY CAN'T JUST
SEE PEOPLE DIE AND LEAVE THEM
LIKE THAT.
THEY SAVE MANY LIVES IN THE SEA.
NOT ONLY US, BUT MANY PEOPLE.
AND I HOPE THEY ARE STILL DOING
IT.
>> Sreenivasan: PHOTOGRAPHS ARE
A FUNDAMENTAL PART OF HOW WE
DOCUMENT CURRENT EVENTS.
BUT IN THE DIGITAL AGE, THE
TOOLS TO EDIT AND DOCTOR PHOTOS
ARE ACCESSIBLE TO ANYONE WITH A
COMPUTER OR SMARTPHONE.
AN EXHIBIT IN NEW YORK EXPLORES
PROMINENT CASES OF IMAGES
ALTERED BY JOURNALISTS AND ASKS:
IF SEEING IS BELIEVING, HOW
OFTEN ARE YOU, THE VIEWER OR
READER, BEING MISLED?
THE NEWSHOUR'S SASKIA DE MELKER
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU DON'T LIKE
THOSE PEOPLE OR OBJECTS IN THE
BACKGROUND, YOU JUST REMOVE
THEM.
USING A FILTER, AFTER THE SNAP,
TO MAKE A REGULAR PHOTO LOOK
VINTAGE, IS AS EASY AS A MOUSE
CLICK.
SO IS REMOVING A LIGHT POST THAT
SEEMS TO BE SHOOTING OUT OF
SOMEONE'S HEAD BY USING
PHOTOSHOP.
BUT IN THE WORLD OF
PHOTOJOURNALISM, THESE
ALTERATIONS ARE THE SUBJECT OF
INTENSE DEBATE.
AND USING PHOTOSHOP CAN LAND YOU
IN HOT WATER.
LIKE IT DID FOR "THE ECONOMIST"
WHEN IT REMOVED PEOPLE FROM THIS
BEACH PHOTO OF PRESIDENT OBAMA.
OR FOR AN ORTHODOX ISRAELI
NEWSPAPER WHEN IT CUT OUT THE
FEMALE LEADERS IN THIS PHOTO.
>> PEOPLE DO THAT ALL THE TIME
ON THEIR FACEBOOK PAGE.
THAT'S FINE.
WE'RE THE PROFESSIONALS.
WE HAVE TO MAINTAIN STANDARDS
AND ETHICS.
WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE THAT THESE
PHOTOS ARE AN ACCURATE
REPRESENTATION.
>> Reporter: PHOTOGRAPHER
MICHAEL KAMBER HAS COVERED
CONFLICTS AROUND THE WORLD FOR
THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
HIS LATEST PROJECT, THOUGH, IS
CURATING AN EXHIBITION AT THE
BRONX DOCUMENTARY CENTER CALLED"
ALTERED IMAGES," WHICH EXPLORES
NEWS AND DOCUMENTARY PHOTOS THAT
HAVE BEEN MANIPULATED.
>> THE MORE WE LOOKED, THE MORE
WE FOUND, ESPECIALLY LATELY,
ESPECIALLY IN THE DIGITAL AGE.
IT WAS ACTUALLY HARD TO BRING IT
DOWN TO THESE 40 PHOTOS.
>> Reporter: THE EXHIBIT SPANS
PHOTOJOURNALISM HISTORY AND
INCLUDES EXAMPLES OF STAGING:
DIRECTING SUBJECTS LIKE THE BOY
IN THIS IMAGE.
OR MISLEADING CAPTIONS: THIS MAN
WAS NOT A SNIPER.
AND YES, PHOTOSHOPPING: JOHN
KERRY WAS NEVER AT THIS ANTI-
VIETNAM RALLY WITH JANE FONDA.
ONE OF THE FIRST CASES OF
CONTROVERSIAL DIGITAL PHOTO
MANIPULATION OCCURRED IN 1982
WITH THE GREAT PYRAMIDS OF
EGYPT.
>> NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC TOOK A
HORIZONTAL PHOTO AND WANTED TO
PUT IT ON A VERTICAL COVER.
AND THEY MOVED THE PYRAMIDS
CLOSER TOGETHER.
THAT WAS SOMETHING THAT REALLY
GOT PEOPLE'S ATTENTION.
ANOTHER REALLY EGREGIOUS EXAMPLE
OF MANIPULATION IS THE LOS
ANGELES TIMES PHOTO FROM 2003,
WHERE A PHOTOGRAPHER TOOK TWO
PHOTOS.
THEY WERE BOTH QUITE DRAMATIC.
THERE WAS A BRITISH SOLDIER IN
THE PHOTO AND THERE WAS AN IRAQI
CIVILIAN.
IN ONE PHOTO HE LIKED THE WAY
THE SOLDIER LOOKED.
AND IN THE OTHER PHOTO HE LIKED
THE WAY THE CIVILIAN LOOKED.
SO HE DECIDED TO JUST COMBINE
THE TWO PHOTOS IN PHOTOSHOP.
AND IT WAS ACTUALLY PRINTED ALL
OVER THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: WHEN THE
INCONSISTENCIES WERE NOTICED,
THE PHOTOGRAPHER LOST HIS JOB.
PHOTO MANIPULATION IS AS OLD AS
PHOTOGRAPHY ITSELF.
TAKE THIS PHOTO OF PRESIDENT
LINCOLN.
IT'S ACTUALLY LINCOLN'S HEAD ON
SENATOR JOHN CALHOUN'S BODY.
OR THIS PORTRAIT OF GENERAL
ULYSSES GRANT.
IT LAYERS THREE SEPARATE IMAGES
FROM DIFFERENT TIMES AND
LOCATIONS.
EVEN BEFORE PHOTOGRAPHY WENT
DIGITAL, THE MEDIA ALTERED
PHOTOS.
IN THIS FAMOUS IMAGE OF THE KENT
STATE MASSACRE, THE FENCE BEHIND
THE GRIEVING TEENAGE GIRL WAS
REMOVED.
IN 1994, "TIME MAGAZINE" IGNITED
A FIRESTORM FOR MAKING FOOTBALL
HERO O.J. SIMPSON, THEN ACCUSED
OF MURDERING HIS WIFE, LOOK
DARKER AND BLACKER THAN HE
REALLY WAS.
NEWSWEEK DIDN'T.
IN 2006, THE REUTERS NEWS AGENCY
YANKED A PHOTO OF THE ISRAELI-
BOMBED BEIRUT SKYLINE AFTER IT
LEARNED THE PHOTOGRAPHER USED
PHOTOSHOP TO CLONE AND DARKEN
THE SMOKE TO MAKE THE DAMAGE
LOOK WORSE.
TWO YEARS AGO, THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS FIRED THE PHOTOGRAPHER WHO
EDITED OUT A VIDEO CAMERA SEEN
IN THE FOREGROUND OF THE IMAGE
OF THIS SOLDIER.
>> ONCE WE START REMOVING THINGS
FROM PHOTOS THEN PRETTY MUCH
EVERYTHING IS ON THE TABLE FOR
NEGOTIATION.
WE CAN'T BE NEGOTIATING THIS.
WE CAN'T BE NEGOTIATING WHAT IS
INSIDE THE FRAME.
IT HAS TO BE WHAT WAS ACTUALLY
THERE WHEN YOU TOOK THE PHOTO.
>> Reporter: STILL, IN THIS
YEAR'S COVETED WORLD PRESS PHOTO
CONTEST, 20% OF THE FINALISTS
WERE DISQUALIFIED FOR
SIGNIFICANT ALTERATIONS TO THEIR
PHOTOS.
>> YOU'VE GOT TECHNOLOGY, AND A
PUBLIC THAT KNOWS IT'S THERE,
WHICH CREATES ALL KIND OF ROOM
FOR DOUBT.
>> Reporter: COLUMBIA JOURNALISM
SCHOOL PROFESSOR BRUCE SHAPIRO
SAYS THE INTERNET MAGNIFIES THE
CONSEQUENCES OF MANIPULATED
IMAGES.
>> POWERFUL IMAGES OF CURRENT
EVENTS, OF CONTROVERSIES, OF
ABUSES HAVE BEEN AN IMPORTANT
DRIVER OF SOCIAL CHANGE AND
PUBLIC POLICY.
IF THE PUBLIC, IF THE NEWS
CONSUMING, IMAGE CONSUMING,
PICTURE DRENCHED PUBLIC LOSES
CONFIDENCE IN THE ABILITY OF
PHOTOGRAPHERS TO TELL THE TRUTH
IN A FUNDAMENTAL WAY, THEN THE
GAME IS UP.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE RECENT 20%
DROP IN CRUDE OIL PRICES MIGHT
BE SAVING YOU MONEY AT THE GAS
PUMP, BUT IT'S NOW PROMPTING JOB
LAYOFFS BY U.S. ENERGY
COMPANIES.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
HOUSTON, IS LYNN COOK OF THE
WALL STREET JOURNAL.
>> HOW BAD IS IT FOR THE ENERGY
INDUSTRY?
>> IT'S PRETTY BAD BECAUSE
ENERGY COMPANIES WERE EXPECTING
A REBOUND IN THE OIL PRICE.
THEY THOUGHT IT WOULD GO FROM 60
TO 70 OR $80 DURING THE SECOND
HALF OF THE YEAR AND IT'S NOW
DROPPED BELOW $50 A BARREL.
SO COMPANIES ARE HAVING TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT DO THEY HAVE TO
DO TO WEATHER THIS, NOT JUST
THIS YEAR BUT ALL OF NEXT YEAR
TOO.
>> IS THIS PARTLY BECAUSE THE
INDUSTRY HAS BECOME MORE
PRODUCTIVE ALL THE TIME?
>> IT IS, BECAUSE AMERICAN
DRILLERS HAVE DRILLED A LOT.
THEY'VE BECOME MORE EFFICIENT,
PUMPING MORE OIL AND GAS OUT OF
THE GROUND EVEN THOUGH THEY'RE
DRILLING LESS AND IT'S NOT JUST
IN THE U.S.
THERE ARE A LOT OF REALLY BIG
OIL PRODUCERS IN THE WORLD THAT
ARE PUTTING MORE AND MORE CRUDE
INTO AN ALREADY SATURATED
MARKET.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW MANY PEOPLE
ARE WE TALKING ABOUT WHEN IT
COMES TO LAYOFFS?
>> ESTIMATES I'VE SEEN ABOUT
150,000 PEOPLE LAID OFF SO FAR.
AND THOSE HAVE BEEN TYPICALLY
BLUE COLLAR TYPE WORKERS AND NOW
WE'RE LOOKING AT THOUSANDS MORE
BETWEEN NOW AND THE END OF THE
YEAR.
THOSE MAY BE WHITE COLLAR, VERY
EDUCATED HIGHLY SKILLED PEOPLE
LIKE ENGINEERS AND GEOLOGISTS.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE GOING
TO BE PEOPLE THAT SAY LOOK THESE
ARE BIG PROFITABLE COMPANIES AND
THEY SHOULD HAVE PLANNED BETTER.
>> WHEN OIL IS $100 A BARREL YOU
JUST HIRE PEOPLE, YOU DON'T HAVE
TO BE EFFICIENT.
NOW THE BUDGET LOOKS VERY, VERY
BLOATED.
>> Sreenivasan: LYNN COOK,
JOINING US LIVE FROM HOUSTON,
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
BRITISH CYCLIST CHRIS FROOME
HAS WON THE TOUR de FRANCE FOR
THE SECOND TIME.
WEARING THE LEADER'S YELLOW
JERSEY, HE LED THE PACK DOWN
CHAMPS-ELYSEES IN THE FINAL
STAGE.
HE WON THE 21-DAY, 2,000-MILE
RACE BY ONE MINUTE, 12 SECONDS.
HE ALSO WON IN 2013.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR, A
REPORT FROM TURKEY'S BORDER WITH
SYRIA, WHERE THE FIGHT AGAINST
I.S.I.S. INTENSIFIES, AS
U.S. AND COALITION JETS BEGAN
USING A KEY TURKISH AIR BASE.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.